= psABI meeting 22nd August 2022

Attendees: Kito Cheng (chair), Jessica Clarke (co-chair), Mark Himelstein, Anders Berg, Anders Lindgren, Christoph Muellner, Ibrahim Qashqoush, Jiawei, Jim Wilson, JojoR, Luis Marques, Philip Reames, Simon Cook

= Status Update

Kito: Public review still has one week, ends next Monday. Received several issues, especially from LLVM community.

= #334 Document the behavior of larger-than-type bitfields

Kito: Disallowed in C but allowed in {Cpp}. Standard defines semantics of extra bits. +
Mark: If this is target-independent why do we need to specify it? +
Jess: Standard specifies semantics but not specifics of the layout. Traditionally varies based on endianness, and MSVC differs from Unix compilers.

= #325 Document how merge elf file headers and ELF attribute

Kito: Didn't previously document how to merge the attributes. Two important parts, privilege spec version and extension versions. GNU ld errors on mismatch for former, but too restrictive. Could deprecate attribute given ISA string can encode it. Thoughts? +
Mark: Is this implemented? +
Kito: Currently only binutils checks it. LLD doesn't. +
Mark: So does something need to be implemented before ratification? +
Kito: Fine if just deprecating. As far as I know Clang/LLVM never implemented the attribute.
Mark: Any objections? Ok, note that this is the choice.

Kito: For merging different extension versions, have two choices, can define how to merge or leave unspecified. +
Mark: According to Krste, versions are only prior to ratification, never changes post-ratification. +
Kito: Should be true for now but still have special cases from before. I2P0 and F2P0. +
Mark: That's fine but don't create a big mechanism to deal with something transitory. +
Kito: Will be easier then. +
Mark: Should have some non-normative text stating the version numbering policy. +
Kito: Which document mentions this? +
Mark: Krste said was in unpriv. Can send mail to him if needed.
Jess: Still need to deal with I2P0 vs I2P1. LLVM still emits I2P0 I believe. Transition is a bit painful due to Zicsr being split out, and doesn't really achieve that much other than updated spec conformance, hence hasn't been done. +
Mark: Shouldn't bend over backwards for things that don't conform to the spec. +
Jess: Ideally yes, but in reality if you don't support this you won't support LLVM, and won't support files built by GNU toolchains older than around a year. So not useful/helpful to have a spec that doesn't say what to do here. +
Mark: Can add a non-normative

= #329 Clarify the detail rule of Tag_RISCV_arch

Kito: Currently underspecified. Should be lowercase, every extension should be separated with an underscore and should follow canonical order. However, ISA manual doesn't handle shorthand extensions (e.g. Zks = Zbkb + Zbkc + Zbkx + Zksed + Zksh). Would like to specify that if you specify all of them then the shorthand extension is added. Currently implemented in LLVM and GNU. +
Mark: What's the plan for updates? Every year like for UEFI and SBI? +
Kito: Should update every year with no incompatible extensions. +
Mark: Hoping that profiles is ratified next year. Would like toolchains to move towards profiles. May need note that things will change here. +
Kito: Can translate profile into ISA string. +
Mark: If something's profile-compliant, need to specify the profile. +
Kito: Can add an extra field. +
Mark: Need to think about what happens for things like Zk. Do you expand out? Don't think that's going to work out in the long term. Suggest have non-normative text in the document saying the next version will accommodate the future profiles etc. **Action item**. Don't believe discussion between profiles and psABI has happened. +
Kito: Christoph has had some discussion here. +
Christoph: Had a discussion on toolchains and runtimes mailing list. Suggestion from Krste to add it to ISA string. From toolchain side request to not define it too early, want to wait until it's ratified in case it ends up changing. +
Mark: Agree, chicken and egg problem here.

= Tag_RISCV_arch: PR#292

Kito: Discussed before. Didn't get details from Palmer. Think we should just merge this. +
Mark: Are you waiting for closure from Palmer? +
Kito: Jessica and I believe it's fine since it's compatible with the old implementation. Want to be sure there are no issues. Wanted to get Palmer's view of what the issue is, but didn't get one. +
Mark: Rivos has a program manager working with RISC-V. Will send you intro, she can help you get closure with Palmer if you need it.

= Process of Designing EABI

Kito: Want to identify all possible deviations, discuss them in meetings, accept or reject them, then define how to implement them.

= Present deviation sets?

Kito: Lots of flexibility from deviations. Freedom can cause issues for toolchains. Could define multiple presets to focus on and provide multilibs for. +
Mark: Is this for this or next year? +
Kito: Next year. +
Mark: Asked before, please pick another name than deviations. +
Jess: Already use the term variant for different calling conventions, could use that. +
Mark: Useful to mark slides as 2023 too. TG will disband after this, will have to ask TSC for new TG. UEFI and SBI people went and asked TSC if one TG for all their documents was fine. May want to do the same for toolchains and runtimes if there are other documents like this. +
Christoph: Have a couple of other documents, toolchain conventions and C APIs. +
Kito: Missed the other big one, assembly manual. +
Christoph: Idea of an updating TG is not bad, but too early, need to get those documents into shape and make them complete. But psABI is already in that sate, have a lot of things for future versions like vector calling convention.

Mark: Are we done with 2022 items? +
Kito: Yes. +
Mark: How long until we're ready after public review? +
Kito: Need to finish updating the sheet. +
Mark: TSC is a two week vote, board meeting every month. Seems to me you're aiming for October. Should put forward a timeline to figure out when things need to be done to hit the October board meeting. +
Jess: What's the date for the meeting? +
Mark: Third Thursday for the board meeting. Will be a lot of competition for resources in this time frame, sooner you get it under way the more likely you are to get it done this year. +
Kito: First thing to do is address all the comments, then go through AR. +
Mark: Also need committee chairs sign-off. Can happen simultaneously.

= Vector ABI

Kito: Would like vector calling convention in next release next year. Need data from benchmarks, and requirements, to inform its definition.
